Property rules documentation (#1076)
neo4j/docs-operations: modules/ROOT/pages/authentication-authorization/property-based-access-control.adoc

:description: How to use Cypher to manage property-based access control on graphs.

////
[source, cypher, role=test-setup]
----
CREATE ROLE regularUsers;
----
////

[role=enterprise-edition aura-db-enterprise]
[[property-based-access-control]]
= Property-based access control

> It is possible to create `READ` privileges that are based on properties on nodes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is possible to create `READ` privileges that are based on properties of nodes.
```

> It is possible to create `READ` privileges that are based on properties on nodes.

Reviewer 2: using `READ` in this format makes me think it only applies to the READ privilege and not all the read privileges aka READ, TRAVERSE and MATCH. I think this should be make more clear in this whole paragraph

> To specify which property to base the `READ` privilege the `pattern` syntax described bellow is used,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To specify the propery/value conditions of the `READ` privilege the `pattern` syntax described bellow is used,
```

> To specify which property to base the `READ` privilege the `pattern` syntax described bellow is used,

Reviewer 2: bellow or below?

for more information about `READ` privilege syntax see xref:authentication-authorization/privileges-reads.adoc[read privilege] page.
Adding property-based access control can incur a significant performance overhead in certain scenarios,
see xref:authentication-authorization/limitations.adoc#property-based-access-control-limitations[Limitations] for more detailed information.
To reduce the performance impact, we recommend using Block Storage as this is better optimised for the kind of read required for the resolution of property-based privileges.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Factors which will exacerbate the performance impact of having property rules are: 

1. The number of properties on the nodes concerned (more properties = greater performance impact) 
2. The number of property-based privileges (more property-based privileges = greater performance impact). 
3. The type of the privilege: `TRAVERSE` property-based privileges have a greater performance impact than `READ` property-based privileges. 

For performance-critical scenarios it is recommended to design  xref:authentication-authorization/privileges-reads.adoc[privileges based upon labels].

```

> Pattern syntax:

Reviewer 2: I think I'd like at least a small version of how the pattern fit into the general grant/deny/revoke structure, could be something as easy as 
```
GRANT ... ON GRAPH ... FOR pattern TO ...
```
but just something so I don't need to run off to another page to realize I need the FOR keyword or where in the privilege it should go

[source, syntax, role="noheader"]
----

> ([var][:label["|" ...]] "{" property: value "}")

Reviewer 2: might be good to somewhere in the text explicitly state that we only allow property rules for nodes and a single property

Author: Could not come up with a good way of explaining this in the text. Added a note under the description of the pattern syntax. What do you think?

Reviewer 2: Could work, what about something like https://github.com/neo4j/docs-operations/pull/1076#discussion_r1357853921

| (var[:label["|" ...]]) WHERE [NOT] var.property { = value | <> value | IS NULL | IS NOT NULL }
| (var[:label["|" ...]] WHERE [NOT] var.property { = value | <> value | IS NULL | IS NOT NULL } )
----
[NOTE]
====
For more details about the syntax descriptions, see xref:database-administration/syntax.adoc[].
====

For example, to grant role `regularUser` the ability to `READ` property `address` on nodes with labels `Email` or `Website` where the domain is `exampledomain.com`:
[source, syntax, role="noheader"]
----
GRANT READ { address } ON GRAPH * FOR (n:Email|Website) WHERE n.domain = 'exampledomain.com' TO regularUsers
----
if preferred the same can be expressed using this syntax as well:
[source, syntax, role="noheader"]
----
GRANT READ { address } ON GRAPH * FOR (:Email|Website {domain: 'exampledomain.com'}) TO regularUsers
----

Granting `TRAVERSE` privilege on nodes with label `Email` where property `classification` is `NULL` to role `regularUsers`:
[source, syntax, role="noheader"]
----
GRANT TRAVERSE ON GRAPH * FOR (n:Email) WHERE n.classification IS NULL TO regularUsers
----

> To grant read privilege only for nodes that have a specific value on a property.

Reviewer 2: this sentence seems out of place?

Author: removed. I think it just was a copy paste mistake.

:description: How to use Cypher to manage property-based access control on graphs.

////
[source, cypher, role=test-setup]
----
CREATE ROLE regularUsers;
----
////

[role=enterprise-edition aura-db-enterprise]
[[property-based-access-control]]

> = Property-based access control

Reviewer 2: I think since it's an extension of the read privileges I'd put it after the read but before the write
```
*** xref:authentication-authorization/manage-privileges.adoc[]
*** xref:authentication-authorization/privileges-reads.adoc[]
*** xref:authentication-authorization/property-based-access-control.adoc[]
```

> = Property-based access control

Reviewer 3: There is no change. I might have already been tired. It was a long review.

It is possible to create read privileges that are based on properties of nodes.
Each property-based privilege can only be restricted by a single property.
To specify the property/value conditions of the read privilege the `pattern` syntax described below is used,
for more information about read privilege syntax see xref:authentication-authorization/privileges-reads.adoc[read privilege] page.

Adding property-based access control can incur a significant performance overhead in certain scenarios,
see xref:authentication-authorization/limitations.adoc#property-based-access-control-limitations[Limitations] for more detailed information.
To reduce the performance impact, we recommend using Block Storage as this is better optimised for the kind of read required for the resolution of property-based privileges.

Factors which will exacerbate the performance impact of having property rules are:

1. The number of properties on the nodes concerned (more properties = greater performance impact)
2. The number of property-based privileges (more property-based privileges = greater performance impact).

> 3. The type of the privilege: `TRAVERSE` property-based privileges have a greater performance impact than `READ` property-based privileges.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* The type of the privilege: `TRAVERSE` property-based privileges have a greater performance impact than `READ` property-based privileges.
```

> * The type of the privilege: `TRAVERSE` property-based privileges have a greater performance impact than `READ` property-based privileges.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The type of the privilege: `TRAVERSE` property-based privileges have a greater performance impact than `READ` property-based privileges.
* The type of storage medium in operation. The performance impact of property-based privileges will be considerably amplified by accessing disc storage.
```

> For performance-critical scenarios it is recommended to design  xref:authentication-authorization/privileges-reads.adoc[privileges based upon labels].

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For performance-critical scenarios, it is recommended to design privileges based on labels.
For more information, see xref:authentication-authorization/privileges-reads.adoc[Read privileges].
```

Pattern syntax:
[source, syntax, role="noheader"]
----
([var][:label["|" ...]] "{" property: value "}")
| (var[:label["|" ...]]) WHERE [NOT] var.property { = value | <> value | IS NULL | IS NOT NULL }
| (var[:label["|" ...]] WHERE [NOT] var.property { = value | <> value | IS NULL | IS NOT NULL } )
----
[NOTE]
====

> For more details about the syntax descriptions, see xref:database-administration/syntax.adoc[].

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For more details about the syntax descriptions, see xref:database-administration/syntax.adoc[Cypher syntax for administration commands].
```

====

> This pattern syntax are used in the xref:authentication-authorization/privileges-reads.adoc[read privileges] as this:

Reviewer 3: We try to avoid using words like "as this", "like this", "this is how you can do it", etc.:
 
```suggestion
You can use this pattern syntax for defining read privileges as follows:
```

[source, syntax, role="noheader"]
----
GRANT ... ON GRAPH ... FOR pattern TO ...
----

> For example, to grant role `regularUser` the ability to `READ` property `address` on nodes with labels `Email` or `Website` where the domain is `exampledomain.com`:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
.Granting permission to `READ` the `address` property on `Email` or `Website` nodes with domain `exampledomain.com` to role `regularUsers`:
```

[source, syntax, role="noheader"]
----
GRANT READ { address } ON GRAPH * FOR (n:Email|Website) WHERE n.domain = 'exampledomain.com' TO regularUsers
----
If preferred the same can be expressed using this syntax as well:
[source, syntax, role="noheader"]
----
GRANT READ { address } ON GRAPH * FOR (:Email|Website {domain: 'exampledomain.com'}) TO regularUsers
----

> Granting `TRAVERSE` privilege on nodes with label `Email` where property `classification` is `NULL` to role `regularUsers`:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
.Granting permission to `TRAVERSE` nodes with label `Email` where property `classification` is `NULL` to role `regularUsers`:
```

[source, syntax, role="noheader"]
----
GRANT TRAVERSE ON GRAPH * FOR (n:Email) WHERE n.classification IS NULL TO regularUsers
----

> The role `regularUsers` can be denied to read and traverse nodes where the property `classification` is not `UNCLASSIFIED`:

Reviewer 3: Move it as an example caption one line below.
```suggestion
```

> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
.Denying permission to `READ` and `TRAVERSE` nodes where the property `classification` is different from `UNCLASSIFIED` to role `regularUsers`:
```

Author: Should the dot in the start be there? looks odd?

Reviewer 3: Yes, this will be the caption of the example. When we agree on everything, I'll build it locally and fix it if there are any formatting issues.

To reduce the performance impact, it is recommended to use the Block Storage format as it is better optimized for the kind of read required for the resolution of property-based privileges.

Some of the factors that can worsen the impact on performance when having property rules are:

* The number of properties on the nodes concerned (more properties = greater performance impact)
* The number of property-based privileges (more property-based privileges = greater performance impact).
* The type of the privilege: `TRAVERSE` property-based privileges have a greater performance impact than `READ` property-based privileges.
* The type of storage medium in operation. The performance impact of property-based privileges will be considerably amplified by accessing disc storage.

For performance-critical scenarios, it is recommended to design privileges based on labels.
For more information, see xref:authentication-authorization/privileges-reads.adoc[Read privileges].

Pattern syntax:
[source, syntax, role="noheader"]
----
([var][:label["|" ...]] "{" property: value "}")
| (var[:label["|" ...]]) WHERE [NOT] var.property { { = | <> | > | >= | < | <= } value | IS NULL | IS NOT NULL }

> | (var[:label["|" ...]] WHERE [NOT] var.property { { = | <> | > | >= | < | <= } value | IS NULL | IS NOT NULL } )

Reviewer 2: one thing to keep in mind for when this is ready for merge/GA is that we'll need to update the `additions, deprecations, removals` section (currently in cypher manual, but I think there was some talk about making something for the operations manual/administration section as well since it moved manual so I guess wherever it is at time of GA)

To reduce the performance impact, it is recommended to use the Block Storage format as it is better optimized for the kind of read required for the resolution of property-based privileges.

Some of the factors that can worsen the impact on performance when having property rules are:

* The number of properties on the nodes concerned (more properties = greater performance impact)
* The number of property-based privileges (more property-based privileges = greater performance impact).
* The type of the privilege: `TRAVERSE` property-based privileges have a greater performance impact than `READ` property-based privileges.
* The type of storage medium in operation. The performance impact of property-based privileges will be considerably amplified by accessing disc storage.

For performance-critical scenarios, it is recommended to design privileges based on labels.
For more information, see xref:authentication-authorization/privileges-reads.adoc[Read privileges].

When using property-based access control, ensure the property used for the rule cannot be modified.

> Users who can change this property can affect the granted property-based privileges.

Author: Maybe IMPORTANT to really highlight it

[[property-based-access-control]]
= Property-based access control

> It is possible to create read privileges that are based on properties of nodes.
> To specify the property/value conditions of the read privilege the `pattern` syntax described below is used,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It is possible to create read privileges that are based on properties of nodes.
Each property-based privilege can only be restricted by a single property.
To specify the property/value conditions of the read privilege the `pattern` syntax described below is used,
```
Maybe something like this?

for more information about read privilege syntax see xref:authentication-authorization/privileges-reads.adoc[read privilege] page.

Adding property-based access control can incur a significant performance overhead in certain scenarios,
see xref:authentication-authorization/limitations.adoc#property-based-access-control-limitations[Limitations] for more detailed information.
To reduce the performance impact, we recommend using Block Storage as this is better optimised for the kind of read required for the resolution of property-based privileges.

Factors which will exacerbate the performance impact of having property rules are:

1. The number of properties on the nodes concerned (more properties = greater performance impact)

2. The number of property-based privileges (more property-based privileges = greater performance impact).

> 3. The type of the privilege: `TRAVERSE` property-based privileges have a greater performance impact than `READ` property-based privileges.

Reviewer 2: do you need the empty lines between the numbers?

For performance-critical scenarios, it is recommended to design privileges based on labels.
For more information, see xref:authentication-authorization/privileges-reads.adoc[Read privileges].

> When using property-based access control, ensure the property used for the rule cannot be modified. Users who can change this property can affect granted property-based privileges.

Reviewer 3: One sentence per line and a small correction.
```
When using property-based access control, ensure the property used for the rule cannot be modified.
Users who can change this property can affect the granted property-based privileges.
